Ticket request with separate resumption and new_session counts. (#18)
tlswg/draft-ietf-tls-ticketrequest: draft-ietf-tls-ticketrequests.md

tickets for session resumption than for the initial full handshake that created
the session.  No static choice, whether fixed, or resumption-dependent is ideal
for all situations.

Second, clients do not have a way of expressing their
desired number of tickets, which can impact future connection establishment.
For example, clients can open multiple TLS connections to the same server for HTTP,
or race TLS connections across different network interfaces. The latter is especially
useful in transport systems that implement Happy Eyeballs {{?RFC8305}}. Since clients control
connection concurrency and resumption, a standard mechanism for requesting more than one
ticket is desirable.

Third, we should note that the various tickets in the client's possession
ultimately derive from an initial full handshake.  Especially when the client
was initially authenticated with a client certificate, that session may need to
be refreshed from time to time.  Consequently, a server may periodically
perform a full handshake even when the client presents a valid ticket for a
session that is too old.  When that happens a client should replace all its

> cached tickets with fresh ones obtained from the full handshake.  The

Reviewer: ```suggestion
session that is too old.  When that happens, it is possible that all tickets
derived from the same original session are equally invalid.  A client avoids
a full handshake on subsequent connections if it replaces all stored tickets
with fresh values.  The
```

Author: Thanks, will merge.

As per {{!RFC5077}}, and as described in {{RFC8446}}, TLS servers vend clients an arbitrary
number of session tickets at their own discretion in NewSessionTicket messages. There are

> two limitations with this design.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
three limitations with this design.
```

> First, servers choose some (often hard-coded) number of tickets vended per

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
First, servers vend some (often hard-coded) number of tickets per
```

> connection.  Some servers (e.g. OpenSSL) return a different default number of

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
connection.  Some server implementations return a different default number of
```

tickets for session resumption than for the initial full handshake that created
the session.  No static choice, whether fixed, or resumption-dependent is ideal
for all situations.

Second, clients do not have a way of expressing their
desired number of tickets, which can impact future connection establishment.
For example, clients can open multiple TLS connections to the same server for HTTP,
or race TLS connections across different network interfaces. The latter is especially
useful in transport systems that implement Happy Eyeballs {{?RFC8305}}. Since clients control
connection concurrency and resumption, a standard mechanism for requesting more than one
ticket is desirable.

> Third, we should note that the various tickets in the client's possession

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Third, all tickets in the client's possession
```

> ultimately derive from an initial full handshake.  Especially when the client

Reviewer 3: The various tickets don't have to come from the same initial handshake, so either "each ticket ... derives from" or "each ultimately derive from" or "derive from one or more initial full handshakes" seems needed.

Author: Indeed they don't in theory, but in practice they would, because any time the client sees an initial handshake, it should dump all previous tickets and store only the new ones. :-)

Author: I think I'll have addressed this as well.

was initially authenticated with a client certificate, that session may need to
be refreshed from time to time.  Consequently, a server may periodically

> perform a full handshake even when the client presents a valid ticket for a

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
force a full handshake even when the client presents a valid ticket for a
```

Author: "force" is fine. I'll merge that.

in their possession, or risk ticket re-use.
- Connection racing: Happy Eyeballs V2 {{?RFC8305}} describes techniques for performing connection
racing. The Transport Services Architecture implementation from {{?TAPS=I-D.ietf-taps-impl}} also describes
how connections can race across interfaces and address families. In such cases, clients may use
more than one ticket while racing connection attempts in order to establish one successful connection.

> Requesting multiple tickets a priori equips clients with enough tickets to initiate connection racing while

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Having multiple tickets equips clients with enough tickets to initiate connection racing while
```

Author: merged

in their possession, or risk ticket re-use.
- Connection racing: Happy Eyeballs V2 {{?RFC8305}} describes techniques for performing connection
racing. The Transport Services Architecture implementation from {{?TAPS=I-D.ietf-taps-impl}} also describes
how connections can race across interfaces and address families. In such cases, clients may use
more than one ticket while racing connection attempts in order to establish one successful connection.
Having  multiple tickets equips clients with enough tickets to initiate connection racing while
avoiding ticket re-use and ensuring that their cache of tickets does not empty during such races.

> Moreover, as some servers may implement single-use tickets (and even session ticket encryption keys),

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Moreover, as some servers may implement single-use tickets,
```

> distinct tickets will be needed to prevent premature ticket invalidation by racing.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
distinct tickets prevent premature ticket invalidation by racing.
```

- Decline resumption: Clients can indicate they have no intention of resuming connections by
sending a ticket request with count of zero.

> As noted earlier, clients that ask for only a modest ticket count on resumption

Reviewer 2: Can we simplify this text and move it to the following section? For example:

```
As discussed in {{introduction}}, clients may want different numbers of tickets
for fresh or resumed handshakes. Clients may indicate to servers their desired 
number of tickets for a single connection, in the case of a full handshake or 
resumption, via the following "ticket_request" extension:

...
```

~~~
struct {
    uint8 new_session_count;
    uint8 resumption_count;
} TicketRequestContents;
~~~

new_session_count
: The number of tickets desired by the client when the server chooses to

> negotiate a fresh session (full handshake), thereby implicitly invalidating all

Reviewer 3: Implicit invalidation is something that we assume for the purposes of this mechanism, but is not a protocol requirement or universal invariant.

Author: Yes, it is the most plausible conclusion the client can draw from the fact that the present ticket failed to work.

Reviewer 3: Yes.  We still have to document it as an assumption, though.

Author: I think I addressed this in the next commit (coming up shortly).

other tickets sharing the same initial session as the presented ticket.  This
is also the ticket count requested when the client presented no initial ticket
making a full handshake unavoidable.

resumption_count
: The number of tickets desired by the client when the server is willing to

> resume the associated session.

Reviewer 3: "the associated session" may not be the right phrasing; for on, "associated with what"

Author: Associated with the initial handshake that obtained the batch of tickets of which the presented ticket was one.  Tickets issued on resumption are still associated with the same initial session.

Author: If this needs clarification, do you have suggested text?  Or should I try to write some more words here?  I am a bit concerned about writing too much, and making folks even more reluctant to merge this. It is IMHO so far a fairly modest change, modulo explicit reuse support, which can be easily removed if there's no consensus for that (as seems likely... :-( ).

Reviewer 3: I was thinking something like "willing to resume using the ticket being presented in the current handshake" or even just "use the resumption handshake flow"

Clients can use the above structure to indicate the number of tickets they
would prefer to receive when sessions are resumed or new sessions are
negotiated.

Typically, once a client's ticket cache is primed, a resumption count of 1 is a
good choice that allows the server to replace each ticket with a fresh ticket,
without over-provisioning the client with excess tickets.  However, clients that
are racing multiple connections placing a separate ticket in each, will
ultimately end up with just the tickets from a single resumed session, so
in that case a resumption_count commensurate with the number of parallel
sessions would be used.

On the other hand, with e.g. server-to-server traffic with fixed source
addresses and no connection racing, ticket reuse may be appropriate.  Clients
that wish to reuse tickets when possible should send an extension with the
resumption_count set to 0, and the new_session_count set to the value desired

> for a full handshake (typically 1).

Reviewer 3: I'm not very comfortable with the phrasing in this paragraph.  At a minimum we'd need to note that this is in violation of the recommendation from RFC 8446 (as well as the reasoning for diverging from the recommendation, which is basicall already present), but it's not fully clear to me whether we have consensus to make this positive declaration (as opposed to remaining silent on the point in either direction).

Author: It is not a violation, the requirement in C.4 of 8446 is a SHOULD, not a MUST.  Clients and servers that have properly evaluated their situation and concluded that reuse has no downside could make use of this mechanism.  If/when we do specify reuse (perhaps later draft), there can be more caveats here. Consider this a draft, not the final text.

Reviewer 3: It is a violation of the recommendation; it is not a protocol violation.  Feel free to describe it as "behaving contrary to the recommendation" or "using knowledge of particular circumstances that justify deviating from the recommendation" or however you want, just acknowledge that a particular behavior is recommended in the general case and this behavior is not it.

Author: Adding some parenthetical text here...

Servers SHOULD NOT send more tickets than requested for the handshake type
selected by the server (resumption or full handshake) as clients will most
likely discard any additional tickets.

When a resumption is performed, and the requested resumption_count is zero, the

> client is requesting ticket reuse.  If the presented ticket is valid for

Reviewer 3: I think this is what the client is requesting regardless of whether resumption is actually performed.  (Well, provided a ticket is presented, at least...)

Author: Yes.

Author: Updated.

> additional resumptions (only possible when the server supports reuse), it

Reviewer 3: "it" doesn't have a clear antecedent from the grammar.  (It's clearly the server from the logic, but that only helps if you already know what the sentence is saying.)

SHOULD return no tickets.  Otherwise, when either the server does not support
reuse, or the ticket is expiring, and needs to be replaced (e.g. reissued under

> a fresh session-ticket encryption key) the server SHOULD return one ticket.

Reviewer 3: Similarly to the prior paragraph, it's not clear that this approach is going to garner consensus.  It might be more viable to simply state the implications of what the client requests without making recommendations as to server behavior; server behavior is basically up to server policy in this case, and we lack clear agreement on the recommended server behavior.  So, cover

* requested resumption_count of zero is a request to reuse.  (Maybe reiterate "in contravention of the RFC 8446 recommendation")
* how many tickets the server returns provides information about whether the ticket being used to resume the current session remains valid for future resumptions [with the details]

Author: I'll drop the case wherein the server supports reuse if (or when) consensus is declared to be against specifying reuse.

> Servers SHOULD additionally place a limit on the number of tickets they are

Reviewer 3: It's not entirely clear that "SHOULD" is necessary, though I personally don't mind.  (Arguably we should have said this in 8446 if we wanted to, but we didn't.)

Author: I think this was in the document before my edits...

> willing to send, to save resources.  Therefore, the number of NewSessionTicket

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
willing to send (whether for full handshakes or resumptions), to save resources.  Therefore, the number of NewSessionTicket
```

messages sent will typically be the minimum of the server's self-imposed limit
and the number requested.

A server that supports ticket requests MAY echo the "ticket_request" extension
in the EncryptedExtensions message. If present, it contains a
TicketRequestContents structure, where TicketRequestContents.new_session_count

> indicates the number of tickets the server expects to send to the client.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
indicates the number of tickets the server expects to send to the client on this connection.
```

Author: Sure.

> If the extension is echoed, the TicketRequestContents.resumption_count can

Reviewer 3: I think description of the semantics of the echoed TicketRequestContents fields should be within a single paragraph.  (So the "if the extension is echoed" transition would not be needed.)

Author: Sure.

be set to a non-zero value to indicate that the server supports ticket

> reuse, otherwise (i.e. zero) the server does not support ticket reuse.  Ticket

Reviewer 3: It somehow feels more natural to reverse these; with "zero issued tickets" meaning "reuse okay" and a nonzero value implying that it is necessary to issue new tickets for resumptions.  But it doesn't actually matter provided the description is clear (which this is).

That said, we still need to reiterate that setting the value to indicate "supports resumption" remains NOT RECOMMENDED.

Author: Yes, frankly I was not sure which value should indicate reuse support, and indeed the signal that the server does or not does not support reuse is perhaps not strictly needed.  This detail can be tuned as needed.  Yes, reuse is NOT RECOMMENDED.

> reuse has privacy implications and should be used with care or not at all,

Reviewer 3: It wouldn't hurt to mention that advice from 8446 again, I guess.

Author: Sure.

> see the security considerations section.

Reviewer 3: I would actually suggest defining a new structure for the echoed extension, with different names for the fields.  There doesn't seem to be much benefit from overloading the names.

I also note that if I understand correctly, this field's ability to indicate whether the server supports reuse at all is a key fact in order avoid both (1) the perceived need for a magic 0->1 mapping, and (2) scenarios where a client that supports reuse talking to a server that does not support reuse ends up alternating resumption and full handshakes.  Specifically, such a client will know whether to request 0 or 1 tickets for future resumptions against the server in question.

Many of the problems we currently have in this space (without any sort of extension) stem from the fact that the only data available to the client about server ticket policy is from the actual issued tickets, and since the server can issue/not-issue tickets for arbitrary reasons, it's hard to pick up a clear signal from that behavior.

Author: Yes, if we could rely on servers that support reuse to always explicitly signal that fact in an echoed extension, then the 0->1 magic would not be needed, since clients would never attempt reuse with a server that failed to promise it on the initial handshake.

It makes the client's state much more complicated (having to remember how the ticket was acquired, ...), especially in multi-process shared caches, ...  But it is not impossible.

IMHO the 0->1 thing is much cheaper, and the echoed extension is then not really needed. This could use some discussion.

Reviewer 3: I mentioned it on the list, so we should probably have that discussion on the list.  (Not that it sounded like you were planning to have it here anyway...)

~~~
struct {
    uint8 new_session_count;
    uint8 resumption_count;
} TicketRequestContents;
~~~

new_session_count

> : The number of tickets desired by the client when the server chooses to
> negotiate a fresh session (full handshake).  This is also the ticket count
> requested when the client presented no initial ticket making a full handshake
> unavoidable.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
: The number of tickets desired by the client when the server chooses to
negotiate a fresh session (full handshake). 
```

resumption_count
: The number of tickets desired by the client when the server is willing to
resume using the presented ticket.

> Clients can use the above structure to indicate the number of tickets they
> would prefer to receive when sessions are resumed or new sessions are
> negotiated.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Clients can use the above structure to indicate their desired number of tickets
for fresh or resumed connections.
```

Typically, once a client's ticket cache is primed, a resumption count of 1 is a
good choice that allows the server to replace each ticket with a fresh ticket,

> without over-provisioning the client with excess tickets.  However, clients that
> are racing multiple connections placing a separate ticket in each, will

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
without over-provisioning the client with excess tickets.  However, clients
race multiple connections place a separate ticket in each, yet
```

> ultimately end up with just the tickets from a single resumed session, so
> in that case a resumption_count commensurate with the number of parallel
> sessions would be used.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
ultimately end up with just the tickets from a single resumed session.
In that case a resumption_count commensurate with the number of parallel
sessions would be used.
```

> Priming of the ticket cache need not happen all at once.  Clients that
> anticipate opening frequent connections to a given server can ask for 2 or 3
> tickets on each full handshake, and attain the requisite steady-state cache
> size after a few initial full handshakes, without substantial risk of
> "overshoot" or need to accurately predict the connection concurrency.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

When a client presenting a previously obtained ticket finds that the server
nevertheless negotiates a fresh session, the client should assume that any
other tickets associated with the same session as the presented ticket are also

> no longer valid for resumption.  This includes not only the tickets obtained
> during the initial full handshake, but all tickets subsequently obtained as
> part of subsequent resumptions.  Requesting more than one ticket in case a
> full handshake is forced by the server helps to keep the session cache primed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
no longer valid for resumption.  This includes tickets obtained
during the initial full handshake and all tickets subsequently obtained as
part of subsequent resumptions.  Requesting more than one ticket in case a
full handshake is forced by the server helps to keep the session cache primed.
```

> On the other hand, with e.g. server-to-server traffic with fixed source
> addresses and no connection racing, ticket reuse may be an option (ticket reuse
> is NOT RECOMMENDED per Section C.4 of {{RFC8446}}, and is only appropriate when
> replay and privacy concerns do not apply).  Clients that wish to reuse tickets
> when possible should send an extension with the resumption_count set to 0, and
> the new_session_count set to the value desired for a full handshake (typically
> 1).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

Servers SHOULD NOT send more tickets than requested for the handshake type
selected by the server (resumption or full handshake) as clients will most
likely discard any additional tickets.

> When the client presents a ticket for resumption, but the requested
> resumption_count is zero and the new_session_count is non-zero, the client
> is requesting ticket reuse (despite section C.4 of {{RFC8446}}).  If
> the presented ticket is valid for additional resumptions (only possible when
> the server supports reuse), it SHOULD return no tickets.  Otherwise, when
> either the server does not support reuse, or the ticket is expiring, and needs
> to be replaced (e.g. reissued under a fresh session-ticket encryption key) the
> server SHOULD return one ticket.

Reviewer 2: (Suggesting removal of all ticket re-use text!)

```suggestion
```

Servers SHOULD additionally place a limit on the number of tickets they are
willing to send (whether for full handshakes or resumptions), to save
resources.  Therefore, the number of NewSessionTicket messages sent will
typically be the minimum of the server's self-imposed limit and the number
requested.

A server that supports ticket requests MAY echo the "ticket_request" extension
in the EncryptedExtensions message. If present, it contains a
TicketRequestContents structure, where TicketRequestContents.new_session_count
indicates the number of tickets the server expects to send to the client.

> If the extension is echoed, the TicketRequestContents.resumption_count can
> be set to a non-zero value to indicate that the server supports ticket
> reuse, otherwise (i.e. zero) the server does not support ticket reuse.  Ticket
> reuse has privacy implications and should be used with care or not at all,
> see the security considerations section and section C.4 of {{RFC8446}}.

Reviewer 2: (Suggesting removal of all ticket re-use text!)

```suggestion
```

during the initial full handshake, but all tickets subsequently obtained as
part of subsequent resumptions.  Requesting more than one ticket in case a
full handshake is forced by the server helps to keep the session cache primed.

On the other hand, with e.g. server-to-server traffic with fixed source
addresses and no connection racing, ticket reuse may be an option (ticket reuse
is NOT RECOMMENDED per Section C.4 of {{RFC8446}}, and is only appropriate when
replay and privacy concerns do not apply).  Clients that wish to reuse tickets
when possible should send an extension with the resumption_count set to 0, and
the new_session_count set to the value desired for a full handshake (typically
1).

Servers SHOULD NOT send more tickets than requested for the handshake type
selected by the server (resumption or full handshake) as clients will most
likely discard any additional tickets.

When the client presents a ticket for resumption, but the requested
resumption_count is zero and the new_session_count is non-zero, the client
is requesting ticket reuse (despite section C.4 of {{RFC8446}}).  If
the presented ticket is valid for additional resumptions (only possible when

> the server supports reuse), it SHOULD return no tickets.  Otherwise, when

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
the server supports reuse), the server SHOULD return no tickets.  Otherwise, when
```

either the server does not support reuse, or the ticket is expiring, and needs
to be replaced (e.g. reissued under a fresh session-ticket encryption key) the

> server SHOULD return one ticket.

Reviewer 3: I think (on first glance) I'm personally okay with this logic, but we'll need input from the WG, of course.
